AL Income documentation (#310)
SuffolkLITLab/docassemble-AssemblyLine-documentation: docs/alincome/expenses.md

---
id: expenses
title: |
    Expenses: ALExpense and ALExpenseList
sidebar_label: |
  Expenses
slug: /alincome/expenses
---

> The `ALExpenseList` is a class that lets you ask a user about their different expenses in a simple way.

Reviewer: I've noticed you've used the word 'simple' a couple times. You were trying to avoid that, right?

Author: Good catch. I was trying to avoid using it to imply that some coding process was simple, like "Simply change the docassemble configuration or something".  Making things simple (and straight-forward) for our users is an important goal of our libraries though, so it feels valid here? Open to suggestions, but can think of any improvements myself that don't make this sentence longer than it needs to be.

Reviewer: "Simple" here seems a bit over confident, but I see what you're saying. I thought I caught a use of the word lower down being used to express that something was simple to do. I'll have to try and track that down.

```suggestion
The `ALExpenseList` is a class that helps you ask a user about their different expenses.
```

## Guiding Philosophy

Certain court forms ask for a person's expenses as a proof of hardship or burden.
In designing this feature, we tried to reduce the number of questions a user needs
to answer while still asking for specific enough expenses. We don't want to burden the user, but also

> doesn't want the user forget to list any significant expenses they would have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
don't want the user forget to list any significant expenses they would have
```
To match the previous part of the sentence.

* `expense.source` is the source, or name, of the expense. Food expenses could have a source of `"food"`.
  * `expense.display_name` is the name of the source that you want to display to the user. This helps with multi-lingual interviews, where you can show the user the name of the expense, but your interview logic can still refer to a single canonical language name. It also helps add or change additional context to the name that you don't want to write out in your interview logic. For example, `expense.source` could be `"medical insurance"`, but `expense.display_name` could be `"Medical Insurance (including health, dental, and vision)"`.

You won't be using `ALExpense` by itself often though; you'll need a list of expenses from the user, which we'll discuss next.

## ALExpenseList Tutorial

Let's make a short interview that just asks for someone's expenses. These some pieces
of code can be used in longer interviews as well.

### Before

Before you start, we'll assume that you:

* have access to a [developer account on a docassemble server](https://suffolklitlab.org/legal-tech-class/docs/classes/assembly-line/2020-assembly-line-assignment-1#before-you-get-started)

> * have the [`ALToolbox` package installed on your server](https://suffolklitlab.org/docassemble-AssemblyLine-documentation/docs/installation#run-the-installation-script)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* have the [`ALToolbox` or `AssemblyLine` package installed on your server](https://suffolklitlab.org/docassemble-AssemblyLine-documentation/docs/installation#run-the-installation-script)
```
Many people will probably just be using AssemblyLine.

Author: Then they'll have `ALToolbox` already installed? I think I understand what you're pointing out; ppl might not immediately recognize the toolbox package, but they would know if they've installed the general assembly line. I might rephrase this differently to address that.

```suggestion
* have the [`AssemblyLine` package installed on your server](https://suffolklitlab.org/docassemble-AssemblyLine-documentation/docs/installation#run-the-installation-script), or have installed the [`ALToolbox` package](https://github.com/SuffolkLITLab/docassemble-ALToolbox) separately.
```

  to the next question.

  ${ expenses.table }

  ${ expenses.add_action() }
field: review_expenses_screen
```

:::tip Review screens
You can also add the expense list to a [review screen](https://docassemble.org/docs/fields.html#review) with the below code:

```yml
review:
  - Edit: expenses.revisit
    button: |
      **Expenses**:

      % for item in expenses:
      * ${ item.display_name }: ${ currency(item.value) }
      % endfor
```

:::

That's all you need to gather the information, but the ALExpenseList class also
gives you many ways to display the info. This is the same way of displaying the `ALIncomeList` class, so if you've used `ALIncomeList` before feel free to skim through this section.

Let's add one last screen to display our information. We'll
describe what each line of code is doing on the screen.

```yml
event: final_screen
question: Summary of your expenses
subquestion: |
  All of the types of expenses, which we call "sources": ${ expenses.sources() }

  Sum of all of the expenses (by default, this is annually): ${ currency(expenses.total()) }

  Sum of all of the expenses over a month: ${ currency(expenses.total(times_per_year=12)) }

>   Value of just one expense: ${ currency(expenses.total(source="rent")) }

Reviewer: I thought I remembered that multiple expenses could have the same source? If so, "Value of just one category of expense" and the description for "source" might need to be changed too. If not, never mind!

Author: Yes and no. Yes, `ALExpenseList` can have more than once expense from the same source. However the UX that we've landed on as the default (and is being used in this tutorial) won't have things from the same source, as it's showing a dict of checkboxes before hand, with each key for the checkbox as one source.

A user can select other and then add another expense from the same source, but TBH, that was more for resiliency and couldn't remember if there was a specific feature that someone would want to use with that.

Trying to balance being accurate and not confusing users with technical details they shouldn't have to know about to use the library is hard.  The description of source is accurate, and I don't think I would change it, even if we talk about allowing duplicates. I might change this line to be a bit more accurate though.

```suggestion
  Value of expenses with the source "rent": ${ currency(expenses.total(source="rent")) }
```
